we begin with the accusation aiding in
genocide hearings began today at the
international court of justice in the
heag where Nicaragua is claiming that
Germany is and I'm quoting here
facilitating the commission of genocide
in the Gaza Strip naranga is arguing
that Germany is breaching international
law by supplying weapons to Israel for
its military campaign against Hamas
Germany has rejected Nicaragua's
accusations Israel has also repeatedly
denied committing genocide four war
crimes in its response to hamas's
October 7th terrorist
attacks Nicaragua's case against Germany
has two main goals to Halt Berlin's
military exports to Israel and to
restart German funding for the un's
Palestinian refugee
agency their argument that Germany's
actions are in breach of the genocide
convention Germany is failing to honor
its own obligation to prevent genocide
or to ensure respect of international
humanitarian law Germany's supply of
arms to Israel is a central pillar of
Nicaragua's case Germany is Israel's
second largest armed supplier behind the
United States accounting for about 30%
of all Israel's weapon Imports Nicaragua
argues that by continuing to provide
these weapons Germany is enabling Israel
to commit acts of genocide in Gaza the
international court of justice is
currently examining whether Israel has
committed genocide in a separate case
launched by South
Africa in bringing this case before the
court Nicaragua says it is acting on
behalf of the Palestinian people I mean
this is a very important
case obviously for our Palestinian
Brothers but also for the people of
Nicaragua as you may have heard in our
expression in nicara we have enormous
sympathy with the Palestinians with the
S and the Palestinian people are going
through and that's why we felt that we
had to do something obviously the only
thing Niara can do is use the few
recourses it has and one of the few
things that nicara had is some
experience with the international court
of
justice close ties between Nicaragua and
Palestinian organizations date back to
1979 when Palestinian groups supported
the Sandinista Guerilla forces that
overthrew Nicaragua's
dictatorship Germany's staunch support
of Israel goes back to just after the
second world war the German government
sees supporting Israel's security as a
historical responsibility for Germany's
actions in the
Holocaust Berlin categorically rejects
Nicaragua's
accusations Germany does not and never
did violate the genocide convention nor
International humanitarian law NE
directly nor
indirectly will get its chance to make
its case in court on
Tuesday my first guest tonight brings a
wealth of experience in international
criminal justice in 2001 he led the
prosecution of the former president of
Serbia sadan mosovich in front of the
international criminal court I'm happy
to welcome tonight Mr Jeffrey nice he
joins me from London Mr Nice it's good
to have you with us this case before the
court now Nicaragua aiming at Germany in
connection with Israel the Palestinians
in Gaza the accusation of genocide to
the outside Observer this may not seem
intuitive at all what is the reasoning
behind this lawsuit in your
opinion um it is actually quite
intuitive I think if for example you
know that your neighbors about to do
something to the neighbor's partner and
you provide the neighbor with a gun and
the neighbor uses it then of course
you're responsible for the crime that in
part for the crime that the neighbor
commits so it's quite easy to understand
what's being said here and it's not just
in respect of your country but also
extensively in respect of the United
Kingdom as well as in America is that if
the time has come and many people think
it has when uh Israel's conduct of the
war can no longer be justified in War of
law terms then if you provide weapons to
such a country you're becoming a partner
in Breaking the Law of
War further if uh there's any evidence
of genocide by Israel and you know that
there may be genocide going on then
obviously you can't be complicit in
genocide but more than that as the
ambassador of Nicaragua to the he
explained in his address to camera
the genocide Convention of which many
countries are um parties State parties
such as our own country and your country
um article one says as soon as genocide
happens you have to do something about
it now depends on the circumstances if
genocide is happening in a neighboring
country and it is something like the
horrors of the holoc course then maybe
you have to take very strong physical
action but would it make more sense Mr
would it make sense for Nicaragua to to
aim at the United States since you're
talking about your neighbor we know that
that's not possible in this case right
though well that's a matter for
Nicaragua uh but they've chosen to go
against Germany on the basis that
Germany is a very substantial supplier
of arms and that's open to them as a
political decision I can't help with why
they didn't make the the the other
decision that's the one that they've
made I think it's very important for
people to understand and it's been lost
for 70 years since the genocide
convention came to being in
1952 that those who exceed or R to or
ratify the convention owe this
absolutely Hing Duty the minute genocide
may be convicted and you can understand
why it's all apart from the fact that
people who drafted the genocide
convention knew exactly what they spoke
about they'd been in one war probably in
two and they'd seen the horrors of the
uh concentration camps in within the
last 12 months so they knew exactly what
was going on but it's all based if you
if you think about it on the concept
that humanity is single and if humanity
is single then the mental state required
to prove genocide which is that you
intend to destroy another bit of
humanity simply because of who they are
whether it's Jewish people or whether
it's people in Rwanda or Armenians and
so on
if you intend to do that doing something
utterly Dreadful because you're
destroying yourselves but but Mr Nice
not all of humanity is is is a member of
the international criminal court the
United States doesn't recognize this
court for example and I I'm wondering
since Germany does is Germany being
targeted by Nicaragua simply because
it's the next best thing that can be
targeted could easily be I'm afraid
you'll have to ask ask your political
experts about that because it's outside
my sphere of expertise but there've been
plenty plenty of examples over recent
years tragic examples of how powerful
countries have stood in the way of
Justice uh or attempts to deliver
Justice and I think if you were to go
out and ask the citizen on the streets
of Germany or Britain or anywhere else
at the moment most of them would say for
goodness sake let stop the fighting and
for goodness sake let's have this matter
properly ad UC ated by an independent
tribunal and if it happens to be Hamas
only who are culpable so be it because
obviously Hamas are culpable what they
did is without doubt criminal but
equally if there's evidence that Israel
may be criminal then that has to be
tested and what you're not hearing from
the political leaders of the big
countries is that they agree that there
should be a trial criminal or uh in the
icj which is not a criminal court as you
know it's a different kind of the the
prote in survival of the state of Israel
it is part of Germany's reason of State
part of the the DNA if you will of the
German body politic has this commitment
has it made Berlin especially vulnerable
to Legal challenges like what we're
seeing right
now I'm not sure that it's made Germany
especially
vulnerable the creation of the state of
Israel which started at the beginning of
the 19th century with the ball
declaration made by an English Minister
um and then has been supported by many
countries notably the United States of
America but other countries since is a
is a response to the terrible things
that happened to the Jewish people not
just in World War II but for centuries
or indeed Millennia because of rampant
anti-Semitism which has existed all
around the
globe that's one development as soon as
it was happening all those involved who
weren't either Palestinians or uh Jewish
Jewish State people themselves surely
should have recognized that this was an
inevitable problem that was coming and
the Zionist founders of Israel saw that
and I think it's more important perhaps
but again I'm straying outside my
expertise it's more important in fact to
look at what the big and powerful
countries in the United Nations itself
have not done over the last several
decades to enforce either a two-state
solution or a one-state solution and to
resolve this problem and so you've got
two problems in
parallel how we must honor what we've
always tried to honor in respect to the
Jewish people and the Jewish state but
how there's this parallel problem not of
their own initial creation of the
Palestinian people but which citizens
around the world feel very strongly I
want to ask you before we run out of
time you have chaired two tribunals at
the court the the weager and the the
China tribunal in the weager tribunal
the conclusion was that China had
committed genocide under Article 2 of
the 1949 Geno genocide convention you've
been quoted as saying at the time that
there was no other way of bringing the
leadership of the Chinese Communist
Party collectively or individually to
judgment does that also apply today to
Israel and or its allies in the claim of
genocide against Palestinians in
Gaza no slightly different uh the what I
was saying there was that China is
probably at at most vulnerable to the
international court of justice and
that's why our one of the five we only F
made we made a finding of one out of
five possible forms of genocide but we
did make it and we made it with absolute
Clarity Beyond Reasonable Doubt so uh
that's different from the position so
far as Israel is concerned Israel Hammer
always remember both sides and always
remember that hamus has no defense to
what it did on the 7th of October the
international criminal court
a world Court sought of except that a
large part of the world has not signed
up to it but it does have jurisdiction
over isra and therefore it is in a
position and it has said as much
although America and Great Britain I
dare say Germany doesn't wanted to say
this it has jurisdiction over what's
happening involving both concerning both
Hamas and um the Israeli Defense Force
and the Israeli political leadership but
also quite possibly if any other
countries get involved on the ground
because the the basis for jurisdiction
of the international criminal court in
Gaza is the submission to jurisdiction
by the Palestinian Authority in 19 in
2015 immediately after or shortly after
the end of the last major war operation
protective Edge right and it submitted
Juris to the ICC for both the West Bank
territories and for Gaza Mr n
unfortunately we're out of time but we
certainly appreciate you taking the time
to help um give us a critical analysis
of what's going on thank
you you're
welcome let's bring in Dr Lawrence Hill
coron he's an associate professor in law
and co-director at the center for
international law at the University of
Bristol in the UK uh now what is the
reason behind this lawsuit in your
opinion hi there well so so the lawsuit
Alle alleges Germany's responsibility
for for several violation of
international law um both in respect of
its failure to prevent violations within
Gaza including its failure to prevent
genocide its failure to prevent
violations of the laws of armed conflict
and in its actual support its Aid and
assistance particularly in the form of
weapons transfers to Israel and much of
this arises much of the the case in a
way arises from an earlier case
instituted in in January brought by
South Africa against isra Israel in
relation to the assault on Gaza in which
uh South Africa alleges that genocide is
is being committed in Gaza itself and in
legal terms does Nicaragua have a case
here well yes it does and and certainly
nicaragu is not the the first state or
or or or entity to allege these kinds of
violations being committed in Gaza uh we
have had the the UN Secretary General um
make these points the UN committee on
the elimination of racial discrimination
um a number of un special rurs have have
all argue that there is a a risk of
genocide being committed in Gaza the
international court of justice stated in
January that there's a risk of
irreparable prejudice to the rights of
Palestinians to be protected from
genocide and even domestic courts have
have started intervening the Netherlands
Dutch court of appeal um for example
ordered the suspension of arms sales to
Israel on the basis of uh a clear risk
that they'd be used to commit violations
of the law of armed conflict so there's
quite a lot of uh clear evidence o o of
serious risks of violations of
international law being committed in
Gaza now why do you think it is
Nicaragua of all countries filing this
case yeah it's a very good question
nicaragu is actually a common litigant
before the international court of
justice so so so it's appeared quite fre
quently before the court um many of
those cases concern its neighbors in in
Central and South America but some have
concerned other states and in particular
40 years ago uh Nicaragua brought a case
against the United States for the US's
um intervention and support of of uh
Rebel groups within Nicaragua itself and
that was alluded to by Nicaragua's agent
this morning in the court it's also the
case that this is an example of of what
we might think of as public interest
litigation
where an applicant state is bringing a
case against another state not as such
on the basis of harm being committed to
the applicant state but rather in order
to protect particular interests of the
entire International Community and
that's something we've seen increasingly
in the last last 10 to 15
years U Germany says that this case is
quote grossly biased what do you
say well I as I said before I think
there's a considerable amount of
publicly available evidence from very
authoritative sources that serious
violations of international law are
being committed in Gaza and those
violations are such that they not only
entail the responsibility of Israel but
they can also entail the responsibility
of every other state in the world for
failing to prevent those violations and
for aiding and assisting in those
violations so I actually think the
argument on the merits is quite a strong
one uh is with this lawsuit Germany
serving as a scapegoat for the United
States well of course there'll be
implications for other states and the US
is is the principal arms exporter to to
Israel uh so an order from the icj to
suspend weapons transfers to Israel um
would therefore be be an important
consideration for the us as well but
Germany is the second principle exporter
of arms to Israel accounting for
something like 30% of arms exports to
Israel and the obligations being invoked
by Nick rager in this case uh clearly
relate to the to the actual acts and
responsibilities of Germany itself so I
I think I don't think this is a such
using Germany as a scapegoat for the us
it's about Germany's independent
responsibility thank you very much
Lawrence hilor from the center of
international law at Bristol
University